Predicting a basketball player’s successful career by analysing the NBA Draft data is a very challenging work. To predict whether a player will have a successful career or not, we need to determine the important factors that play a vital role in a player’s success. We have collected NBA Draft dataset, College Stats of the NBA Players, and Draft Combine Metrics Dataset. In the datasets we have kept only those players who were given chance to play on the court. After preparing the dataset, we have considered the BPM (Box Plus/Minus) as our target variable because players with good WS/48 value does not always have good BPM value, but players with good BPM value always have good WS/48 values. This BPM value is a continuous variable, which defines a player successful career. To predict this continuous variable, we have used Random Forest Regressor, XGBRegressor, Artificial Neural Network, Deep Neural Network and Decision Tree Regressor. These predictive models will predict continuous target variable BPM based on the features of the datasets. After running all five models on NBA Draft dataset, merged dataset (merging NBA Draft Dataset with Draft Combine Metrics Dataset) and College stats of the NBA players, we have decided to compare the model’s performance metrics MSE and R^2 values with mean and median baseline models’ performance metrics values. We have determined the best performing model “XGBRegressor” run on NBA Draft dataset, which has explained 78% variance in the target variable and has the lowest MSE value 2.84555. Then we have used the feature importance techniques to understand which factors or features have played a vital role in predicting the BPM value. After this, we have created a web application using the XGBRegressor model trained on the NBA Draft data and the features of the NBA Draft dataset. The web application can predict our target variable BPM, using the inputs of the features. This prediction helps a team make a successful draft selection.
